[THEME MUSIC]
>>COMPTON ROM: We had a
serious pandemic in 1918,
and it killed a sizable
portion of our population.
But believe it or not, that
virus is still with us.
Viruses want to live, just
like people want to live.
You can tamper it with
anti-inflammatories.
And the best herbs
to do that is--
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
If there's one thing
infectious disease
has taught humanity,
it's the need for
good systemic health.
Compton Rom is back
with us to elucidate
what we can do to keep
our immune system as
high as possible.
And as a matter of course now
for the rest of our lives,
not just for now.
So Compton, welcome back.
>>ROM: Hi.
>>REGINA: You're always one
of our viewers' favorites,
and it's because you have a
lot of really good knowledge
on this subject.
And we're going to go into some
really interesting facts that
have popped up recently
about the healthier zones
of the world.
And we'll go into
that in a minute.
First, what I wanted
us to talk about
is the recent phenomenon
that has swept the world.
A lot of people think
that, oh, this is just
something that's a blip in
history, going to go away.
But you're talking about
a lot of other things
piling on top of it, including
the notion of global warming
and how global warming
is going to affect
disease patterns in the future.
So I say let's start
there and launch into it
before we start going
into some of the really
interesting useful information
we can help ourselves with.
>>ROM: Right.
So as everyone has
experienced, we
are in the new health normal.
And the new health
normal is we're
taking actions that
we never thought
we were having to take before.
Social isolation, quarantining,
social distancing,
things like that.
But, you know, we have to
take additional actions.
This is not enough.
And one of the best and easiest
ways to do this, and experience
and elevate your game to
the new health normal,
is to increase your immunity.
And we'll be able to do
that by simple diet tricks,
simple exercises, breath work.
And this is the things
that I wanted to go into.
And the main focus that
I want to talk about,
which is near and
dear to my heart,
is how to diversify your
microbiome, because they're
finding out that the
countries with the most
diversified microbiomes
with certain
herbs that decrease inflammation
have the lowest death
rates from infectious disease.
>>REGINA: Viral infections.
>>ROM: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Good.
OK, well, also historically, we
go back a little bit to 1918.
>>ROM: Yes.
>>REGINA: H1N1.
And let's talk about that so we
can understand how viruses work
across the span of history.
>>ROM: Nice.
Well, as many people know, we
had a very serious pandemic
in 1918 called the Spanish flu.
And it killed a sizable
portion of our population.
But believe it or not, that
virus is still with us.
And what people don't understand
is that viruses want to live,
just like people want to live.
And they create a sort
of symbiotic relationship
with their animals
that they inhabit,
whether it be cows, chickens,
bats, humans, whatever.
And in 1918, they were
brand new to humans.
And it killed humans
to a great degree.
But they've symbiotically
linked each other to saying,
OK, I'm going to
inhabit your body,
but I'm not going to
give you mortality.
So they can live as well.
We're still experiencing that.
So they've mutated in
such a way that we're
living with them every day.
So when we take seasonal
flu outbreaks normally,
the H1N1 viruses that
inhabit us with the flus
are still linked
to the 1918 virus.
And the same thing
is going to happen
with every single infectious
disease that we experience.
If it's a brand new
infectious disease,
it causes complete mayhem.
And they just learn
to dance with us.
And that's how we
have to look at them.
>>REGINA: And this
is a long process
that happens and mutates
over many, many years.
>>ROM: Unfortunately.
>>REGINA: It's not
something quick.
>>ROM: It is.
But from the virus's
point of view,
a long process is in
millions of years.
>>REGINA: Yes, right, exactly.
>>ROM: From our
individual point of view--
>>REGINA: We want something
to happen in months.
>>ROM: Exactly.
>>REGINA: So here I've
written down some basic facts.
Viruses have 28
trillion microbes.
And it says over
400 trillion viruses
living within the human body.
A lot of them are
comprised of bacteria.
I mean, this is what
we're made up of.
>>ROM: Yeah.
It's actually the
other way around.
So in a human--
>>REGINA: I wrote
it down backwards?
>>ROM: You did a little bit.
So let me explain to this.
Our human microbiome comprises
of things that we can't see.
That's what microbes are.
We can't see them.
We can't see parasites.
We can't see funguses.
We can't see bacteria.
And we definitely can't
see viruses, right?
So those four things
comprise of our microbiome.
They live inside of us.
These microbes, which are
again the parasites, the fungi,
the yeasts, the bacteria,
and the viruses,
they call this body their home.
Yeah?
So we focused on just one
of those things called
the bacteria.
And we said that
that's the microbiome.
Well, it's not.
So in terms of cells, we have
10 times more cells of bacteria
than the human body.
But in terms of viruses--
>>REGINA: Than human cells.
>>ROM: Right.
So we have about 10
trillion human cells.
When we look at all our eye
cells, and our skin cells,
our blood cells, 10 trillion.
But when we look at all
the bacterial cells,
those are about 100 trillion.
Anywhere from 65
to 100 trillion.
But believe it or
not, the bacteria
themselves have invaders inside
the bacteria called viruses.
And the viruses of
bacteria are called phages.
so there are prokaryotic
viruses, and there are--
>>REGINA: What's that
mean, prokaryotic?
>>ROM: Prokaryotic means one
nucleus, like the pre-nucleus.
And these are the bacteria.
Eukaryotic, which is the human
cells, are the true nuclei.
They have viruses, too.
But the bacteria constantly are
invaded with their own viruses.
And they've come up with
their own defense system
to actually eliminate
those viruses.
And now, genetic engineering has
taken advantage of that system
where the bacteria are
actually surgically excising
those viruses out
of their system.
It's called the CRISPR system.
We're using that in genetic
engineering right now.
But every time they encounter
a virus inside their system,
they just snip it out.
Boom.
It goes out.
So there's a constant interplay
between the viruses that
inhabit the bacteria in our
gut and the viruses themselves.
And believe it or not, while
there's 100 trillion bacteria
in our gut, there could be
up to 500 trillion viruses
in our gut.
And it's called our virome.
>>REGINA: Virome, yes.
And we started on that a little
bit in our last conversation.
>>ROM: Yeah, we don't have no
idea right now how powerful
this virome is and the interplay
that the bacteria have it.
But what is known is
that every time we
get a virus into our
system, the bacteria
are going to react
to that virus.
So if we have a healthy
microbiome, that microbiome,
their number one
enemy is the virus.
And they don't care whether
it's a prokaryotic virus
or a eukaryotic virus.
Their number one thing is
to get rid of that virus
and to figure out how to
live symbiotically with it.
So if we do things to--
that's our number one
helper in our body
to help us alleviate
the symptoms of viruses
or the bacteria.
So every time we
take antibiotics,
every time we take in foods that
hamper the bacteria in our gut
to live, the more
we're suppressing
this innate immune
system to deal
with the viruses
and the diseases
that we're going to get.
>>REGINA: It's interesting
the way you put it.
And what comes to
me is if you're just
looking at it, that each one
of these has their own light.
They have their own
life force, right?
>>ROM: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So here you have
trillions and trillions of tiny
little beings with
their own life force,
with their own intelligence,
with their own survival skills
that are the--
we are the collective
of it with skin over it.
>>ROM: That's right.
We're the ecosystem.
>>REGINA: We're the
ecosystem for these beings,
these little beings.
And so where the
problem first starts
is we've been made to believe
that these little beings
in our own ecosystem
is working against us,
and to have fear that these
outside invaders can overcome
us so easily and quickly.
And really, that the
community, the ecosystem,
starts being made whole at
the top with our own feelings
and emotions and our own faith
in how this all works together
with its own intelligence.
>>ROM: Exactly.
Yeah, the problem
arises where we
believe that us,
as a human being,
is the only sole, proprietary
organism, conscious organism,
in this ecosystem called the
human body when it's not.
We're a collection
of consciousness,
of bacteria, viruses.
They are us.
And to have it be not us and--
>>REGINA: Have
them all perceived
as enemies when that's what
we're constituted from.
>>ROM: Well, that's the
basic problem of our society,
is this disunity and the fact
that we live in a duality.
Like, you better than me.
In all parts of our society,
we live in a duality.
There can only be one
winner, or there can only
be one this or one that,
when we're all a collective.
And that's the way
it works in our body.
Even the viruses want to have
this body, because they can't
live without this human body.
So when they encounter a virus
that doesn't want this body
to live, even 99.9% of
the viruses are saying,
like, what are you doing?
You know?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I mean, and to me, that's
actually a very hopeful way
to look at all of it.
If we can back
up, you don't even
have to look at it
on a spiritual level.
Just look at it on
a biological level.
>>ROM: And an
epidemiological level.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Every one of these little
beings has its own intelligence
and knows what to
do to stay alive.
>>ROM: That's right.
>>REGINA: And wishes
for us to stay alive.
And why can't we trust in
the process of our own bodies
more, but also enhance?
We're going to talk
about the enhancements.
>>ROM: Well, for example,
antibiotics actually come
from microbes.
You know, molds led to
this whole development
of antibiotics, because these
molds and these fungus that
naturally live within us
don't want the body to die.
So when a bacteria came in and
started killing off the body,
like cholera, diphtheria, or--
>>REGINA: Some of the
really aggressive ones.
>>ROM: Exactly.
These funguses are saying,
what are you doing?
So they came up with
their own antibiotics,
which are antibacterial
compounds in the body.
The same thing
that they're doing,
the funguses and the
bacteria, they're
coming out with
antivirals, you know?
And then the human cells, they
come out with these antivirals.
And we need to use the
biological intelligence that's
within us, the
intelligence that's
with everything in
our surroundings,
including our human cells,
the bacterial cells,
the fungal cells,
and the viral cells.
And even the plants that we eat.
They have their
own intelligence.
>>REGINA: And they have their
own bacteria and microbes
that they're bringing with
it when we consume them.
>>ROM: Believe it
or not, they do.
When we're consuming
these raw vegetables,
they're bringing
in the intelligence
of these bacteria that
know how to handle
these viruses that they
encountered in the ecosystem.
>>REGINA: There's a study
that was done recently
that I found fascinating.
And it had to do with what
our bodies are living with all
the time, we're
just not aware of it
because we're asymptomatic.
And they did a study
of 8,000 people.
And I can't remember where
the study originated from,
and I didn't write
it in my notes.
I've just kind of picked
it up along the way.
I think it was Dr.
Zach Bush who was going
into great detail about it.
>>ROM: He's amazing.
>>REGINA: Yeah, he's good.
And he was talking
about this study.
So I was taking notes.
And 8,000 people,
healthy people,
asymptomatic of everything,
just healthy people, had their--
I thought it was the
virome, but anyway, they
had their blood analyzed.
And what they found
was 42% of them had,
he said, significant levels of
HIV, herpes, papillomavirus,
hep B, hep C, and so forth.
And totally unaware of it.
It just lives within us.
I mean, that's almost
half of the people
had high levels
of these things--
significant levels
of these within them.
Not symptomatic at all.
Just living within them,
doing their own thing.
So many of us have already
been exposed to so much.
But then the fear comes when
you see that certain people fall
down with it.
Certain people don't survive it.
And that's what we want to
look at, is the factors of who
survives these things
and who doesn't?
And why?
>>ROM: Right.
You know, there's a
phenomenon in immunity,
and it's-- you know, if you
can break down immunity to very
simplistic levels, we have
what's called an innate
immunity and an
adaptive immunity.
>>REGINA: Where do
the T cells fall in?
>>ROM: The T cells are part
of the adaptive immunity.
>>REGINA: Adaptive immunity.
>>ROM: So innate immunity,
when you look at it,
let's say we're a big castle
and we have to defend ourself.
So the defensive systems
that we have that
protect anything that comes
at us at any time, that's
called our innate immunity.
So the innate
immunity is designed
to handle anything that is
unknown to come with us.
Then once it's known,
they figure out,
hmm, you know, this is
a particular invader
that's coming to invade us.
Let's find out more about him.
And let's find out how to
actually take him down,
specifically for that invader.
That's called the
adaptive immunity.
And the best things
that come out
are the T cells, the B cells,
and they produce antibodies.
So the antibodies are
specific magic bullets
that take these things down.
But there's a time lag in
between the innate immunity
and the reinforcements that come
called the adaptive immunity.
It's that lag in
time that causes
people to actually go down with
a particular disease or not.
>>REGINA: And so
there must be factors
that cause a longer period of
lag time in some versus others.
>>ROM: That's right.
And in this lag time, you
get a lot of inflammation,
because the innate
immunity, what they do
is they do a lot
of secretions, you
know, just to slow down
that thing to come up.
So they'll just-- you'll get
a lot of inflammation that
comes up.
So you get a lot of secretions
to slow that stuff down,
and you've got macrophages,
like, releasing enzymes
to actually tear up
and completely destroy
the cell that's been invaded.
So you have a lot
of dead debris.
And if your reinforcements
from adaptive immunity
don't come fast enough,
you get inflamed.
And you get what's
called a cytokine storm.
And then you get a lot
of bacterial infection,
because the endemic bacteria
that live inside you,
they eat this stuff.
They eat the debris.
So you get bacterial infection.
And it's all because--
>>REGINA: Your whole
immune system crashes.
>>ROM: Your whole
>>REGINA: And that's what
we saw in recent history,
is a lot of people that had
underlying conditions and older
people whose natural defenses
have worn down succumbed.
Right?
>>ROM: That's right.
So one of the--
>>REGINA: Because of that lag
time you're talking about,
just wasn't creating what
needed to be created.
>>ROM: That's right.
And so now, they're finding
out that there are two factors
in decreasing this lag time.
Number one is are you
healthy enough for your body
to respond and
decrease this lag time
between the innate immunity
and the adaptive reinforcement
immunity that's coming in?
And to be healthy enough, the
biggest determinant factor
in being healthy enough is
your gut and your microbiome.
Because these bacteria are
putting out these compounds,
these antivirals and
these antibacterials,
and they're coming
to the rescue.
And they're basically--
they have their own system
and their own bullets.
We don't have to come with
our own magic bullets,
because if we keep
them healthy, they come
with their own magic bullets.
And the way to keep
our microbiome healthy
is to eat the most
diverse diet of fiber
and to be as
plant-based as possible.
When your innate immunity
gets an infectious disease,
it starts defending itself.
But then the microbiome
and the bacteria come up
and they start pinging it
with their own little bullets
and stopping it until your
adaptive response comes in.
And we can do that
through plants and herbs.
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about that.
Let's talk about-- let's
take the Indian diet.
Very, very rich in spices
and herbs, and very rich
in turmeric.
Curry powders and so forth.
But just turmeric alone.
>>ROM: Turmeric
alone has been proven
to be extremely
antiviral, especially
to a class of
infectious organisms
that we all know
and love these days.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And so let's talk about
inflammatory processes,
because you were
speaking earlier
that the cytokine
storm is what really
crashes the immune system.
And let's talk about
things like using garlic,
onions, some people are
allergic to those kind
of sulfur-based things, but once
you ferment-- when you ferment
them, it's a different deal.
You can do fermented
garlic, even if you can't--
I can't do raw garlic, but
I can do fermented garlic.
>>ROM: Right.
So fermenting turmeric
is really important.
And fermenting a lot of these
anti-inflammatory compounds
is very important.
But the main thing is to
prevent the cytokine storm.
So when you encounter
a period in your life,
it's the flu season, or
it's the viral season,
and it's not a matter of whether
you're going to get it or not.
It's when you're going
to get it and what
you're going to do about it.
>>REGINA: Because you're
probably going to be exposed.
Everybody's going to be exposed.
>>ROM: Everyone's going to
be exposed to viruses, right?
So when you know
you're exposed, you
need to focus on preventing
a cytokine storm.
And a cytokine storm is when the
T cells just kind of freak out,
and they go, whoa,
let's start doing this.
Well, you can tamper it
with anti-inflammatories.
And the best herbs to do that
is turmeric that is fermented.
>>REGINA: What if it's
not fermented, just
off the shelves?
Ground up turmeric.
>>ROM: Well, the thing is
it's not very bioavailable.
You have to eat a lot of it.
But the Indians eat lots of it.
They eat curries all the time.
So eating lots of it as
opposed to worrying about
whether it's
bioavailable or not--
>>REGINA: Because you're
eating it in most meals.
>>ROM: That's right.
So if you can get a source
of fermented turmeric,
that would be great.
But you know, another study is--
they say that turmeric
actually prevents not
only the attachment
of viruses to cells,
but it also prevents
the replication.
It's like--
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
>>ROM: Yeah.
It has two properties in one.
So the compounds in turmeric
are called curcumin.
That's the compound in turmeric
that is responsible for that.
But turmeric has about
four different curcuminoids
in there.
And if you ferment it, it
makes it into like eight or 16.
>>REGINA: Oh really?
>>ROM: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Well, I
mean, most people
would say, well, yeah, where
are you going to find that?
I mean, where do you
find fermented turmeric?
Is it readily available?
>>ROM: You know, not really.
>>REGINA: You're
always tinkering
in fermented everything.
I know you are.
>>ROM: At Ascended
Health, we're coming out
with a really neat
fermented turmeric.
But we're also
fermenting hemp with it,
because they're finding
out that turmeric with CBD
really helps against
the cytokines storm.
>>REGINA: Yes, and
CBD has come up
in a lot of different
studies and a lot
of different formulations as
being super helpful in terms
of stopping that storm.
>>ROM: Yeah, CBD
is very helpful.
And when combined with
turmeric, so there's a--
here in Boulder, I
just saw these drinks
with turmeric and CBD.
And I bought,
like, four of them.
They're awesome.
And also astragalus,
another herb, and cordyceps,
a mushroom.
>>REGINA: I was just
going to bring that up.
Cordyceps.
OK, so this is a
little off-topic,
but I want to bring it
up, because everybody's
starting to hear about it,
a lot of our audience will.
The whole thing
with that mud water
where you're taking chai
herbs, all the chai spices,
and you're taking raw
cacao, turmeric, cinnamon,
and four different
cordyceps ground up together
as your morning
drink and replacement
for coffee or black tea.
>>ROM: Yeah.
It's amazing.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
That gets a thumbs up from me.
>>ROM: Have you tried it?
>>REGINA: Oh, I
drink it every day.
I love it.
I mean, I love it.
>>ROM: You're not going
to believe what that's
doing for your microbiome.
>>REGINA: OK, I'm glad I brought
it up, because it just started.
I actually made my own.
You can make your own, you
know, if you can't find it
or-- it's a little pricey.
But I made my own there for
a while, because I ran out.
And let's talk about if
you want to make something
like this for yourself,
what you would be looking to
in terms of cordyceps.
Because they have to be
powdered and ground to work
with this formula for a
drink in the morning, anyway.
>>ROM: Yeah.
First of all, the strain of
cordyceps is very important.
So there's a lot of
cordyceps out there
that are easy to grow.
But the strain that you
want is cordyceps sinensis.
And you want a
particular extract.
>>REGINA: S-I-N-E-N-S-I-S?
>>ROM: Yes.
And there are
particular extracts
of that are good for energy.
But there are other
extracts in that that
are good for anti-inflammation.
So, you know--
>>REGINA: Sinensis.
Which other ones might
be good for this?
>>ROM: Cordyceps militaris.
>>REGINA: Militaris.
Like military?
>>ROM: Yeah.
So the cordyceps militaris
is really good for energy,
but cordyceps sinensis are very
good for anti-inflammation.
>>REGINA: So if you could find
them powdered in capsules,
you could take
them apart and you
could make your own
kind of compound, right?
>>ROM: Yeah.
So if you could find
a supplement that
has a combination of fermented
turmeric, astragalus.
And there's a form
of astragalus that
actually increases your
telomere with astragalosides.
And then finally, with CBD, it
works great for inflammation
and being able to prevent
your body from getting
into that cytokine storm.
>>REGINA: Well, and
like, in this drink
that I drink in
the morning, if you
add in all the
cloves, and nutmeg,
and allspice and cinnamon,
you get these great flavors,
the chai flavors going, you
get something kind of tasty
while you're really enhancing
the health of your microbiome
it sounds like.
>>ROM: But you know
what would really help?
>>REGINA: What?
>>ROM: If you actually
eat the dregs.
>>REGINA: Eat the?
>>ROM: The dregs.
>>REGINA: The dregs.
>>ROM: Yeah, because those
are the insoluble fibers.
>>REGINA: Oh,
yeah, well, you do.
What I do is I just swirl
a little more hot water in
and then just gulp it down.
>>ROM: Nice.
>>REGINA: It's a little
scratchy on the throat.
But no, drink the whole thing.
>>ROM: That's actually
the most important part.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I figured.
>>ROM: Because the
microbiome is made
of these particular
species of bacteria
that feed off of fiber.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ROM: So when you're
talking about eating
probiotic-like
foods, you're mainly
talking about the fiber and
not necessarily the strains
themselves.
So you want to eat the fiber
from all different kinds,
because it feeds
as many-- you want
to get as many diverse microbes
in your gut as possible.
So when you go to the store,
focus on the insoluble fibers
that you're eating.
So we're talking about the
root vegetables like cassava,
and chicory, and Jerusalem
artichoke are really
good probiotic fibers.
But the fruits, like, the
really fibrous fruits.
My favorite is the mango.
>>REGINA: Super fibrous.
>>ROM: Super fibrous.
And eating all that stuff.
>>REGINA: Apples.
>>ROM: Apples.
>>REGINA: Obviously.
>>ROM: That's right,
but eat the skin.
And then other
microbiome builders
are roots that are very bitter.
And leaves that are very bitter.
Like, if you can--
like radishes, and
turmeric is bitter,
and ginger is very bitter.
>>REGINA: I was going
to say and ginseng.
>>ROM: And ginseng.
Yeah.
So those things really
increase these microbes.
But the microbes we need
to be paying attention to
are called the
keystone microbes.
>>REGINA: OK, let's talk
about keystone microbes.
>>ROM: OK.
So there are bacteria,
and then there's bacteria.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
With a big B.
>>ROM: With a big B. So
they're finding out that
in the macro ecosystem, if you
take out certain animals called
the keystone species
out of our ecosystem,
the ecosystem goes crazy.
So you take out the wolves
out of North America--
the wolves are considered
keystone species--
and what happens is they
don't eat the deer that
are too young or too old.
And the deer
population goes crazy.
The rabbit population
goes crazy.
And all the fauna are eaten.
You want to reintroduce
wolves into the population,
and then the ecosystem goes back
down into a manageable system.
So you do that to the elephants
in Africa, the lions in Africa,
the orcas in the sea.
These are all called
keystone species.
They keep everything in check.
The great white sharks
are keystone species.
We can't kill them
off, or else we're
going to get an overgrowth
of all these organisms
that are not very good
for the ecosystem.
They may be cute, but they're
not good for the ecosystem.
And this is what's
happening in our gut.
Every time we're
taking antibiotics,
every time we're
eating GMO foods,
eating processed foods
that our guts don't recognize,
you're not really feeding
the keystone species,
because they're fed on fiber.
They're planted on diverse
plant fiber that's more
bitter than anything, you know?
So we were just talking earlier
about how you love to put lime,
and you like to eat lime.
Well, every time I eat
a grapefruit or a lime,
I make sure I eat the white
part of the grapefruit skin.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
like the white part.
Talk about the value of that.
>>ROM: Well, it turns
on your bile salts.
Every time you're
eating bitterness,
it turns on the bile salts.
So if you eat the white
part of the orange
and the white part
of the grapefruit,
it turns on these
bile salts that
seem to increase these
keystone species in our gut,
namely the Clostridium
group IV cluster in our gut.
>>REGINA: Which is
responsible for what?
>>ROM: It's responsible
for regulating anything.
They're kind of like the
police and the one world
government of our gut.
>>REGINA: Great.
Militarius.
>>ROM: Yeah, yeah.
So the study that
I want to present,
no one's talking
about the microbiome.
But when these
researchers looked
into how diet is affecting the
morbidity and the mortality
rate of certain viruses
that are coming in now,
they're finding out
that the countries that
ate the highest in
fermented vegetables,
not pickled vegetables,
but fermented vegetables--
>>REGINA: Because a lot
of people confuse the two.
Like in Germany,
for example, you
have a lot of pickled
foods with your meals.
But you also have fermented
foods with the meals.
So explain the difference
between the two
so people understand you can't
just have a bread and butter
pickle and have it do the job.
>>ROM: Right.
So pickled foods is using a
lot of vinegar and salt. And it
actually--
>>REGINA: And sometimes sugar.
>>ROM: Sometimes sugar.
But it actually
prevents anything other
than salt-loving
acid-loving bacteria
from growing into the food.
And it's actually a
preservative, high salt
and high acids from vinegar.
It prevents a lot of
bacteria from growing.
So you want foods
with a plethora
of bacteria growing in it.
So you just want fermented
foods where you don't add salt
and you just add a little sugar.
And you just let it sit there
and you ferment vegetables.
>>REGINA: Well, let's go
with the classic standard.
Everybody knows
about it pretty much.
I remember encountering
it ages ago
when I was in South Korea,
the kimchi barrels in people's
backyards.
Of course, I didn't have any
real understanding of it.
I was kind of just
overwhelmed with the scent.
But let's talk about
what's going on there
so we can learn about how we
create this ourselves, even,
how we can create our
own fermented vegetables.
>>ROM: Well, you can take
pre-fermented vegetables
like kimchi and like sauerkraut
and actually mix them together.
And you'll get a lot
of bacteria in there.
And then you just--
you take root vegetables
in from anywhere.
You just chop them up.
>>REGINA: Like carrots,
or turnips, or parsnips?
>>ROM: Yeah.
Carrots have a lot
of sugar in them.
So it's actually good
food for everything.
So carrots, turnips, radishes.
But you want a diversity.
So for the first time, if you've
never visited an Asian market,
if you've never visited
a Middle Eastern market,
a South American market,
go to those markets.
Even the difference
between a regular broccoli
and a Chinese broccoli can
bring up a different species
of microbe in your gut.
So if you've been eating
broccoli all the time,
change it up.
Go to a Chinese broccoli.
And they've got
these hybrid species
of cauliflower and broccoli.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Yeah, they do.
>>ROM: Try the veggies that
you've never tried before;
rutabagas, cassavas.
>>REGINA: So start maybe with
a little kimchi, a little bit
of sauerkraut,
mix them together,
slice up some of these root
vegetables, and let it all sit?
>>ROM: Right.
Just let it all sit.
>>REGINA: In the refrigerator,
or natural room temperature?
>>ROM: That's right.
And add a little bit of honey.
>>REGINA: A little
bit of honey to it
to get the fermentation going.
>>ROM: To get the
fermentation going.
And you don't want
too much kimchi,
because just one kimchi
contains millions and millions
of bacteria.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
>>ROM: So if you don't
like the taste of kimchi,
it's going to be diluted out by
the sauerkraut and the kimchi.
And then, go and get
your favorite probiotic
that you feel really good about.
>>REGINA: And put it in there?
>>ROM: That's right.
These live probiotics.
Well, you know, at
Ascended Health,
we make a probiotic,
ProAlive, that's
got about 300 different
species of bacteria
that we collect
from the blue zones.
>>REGINA: Right.
All over the world.
And we did--
I think we did our
last show on that.
>>ROM: Yeah.
But there's so many good
spore-based probiotics.
You want spore-based probiotics.
Garden of Life makes
a really good one.
You just get it from the store,
and you just take one capsule,
and you put it in with
these root vegetables
and bitter vegetables.
>>REGINA: You don't
need to eat a lot of it.
I mean, you can have a
tablespoon or two with a meal.
So what's the big
picture we're looking
at with this information?
Which is exciting, because
anyone can make a concoction.
It's cheap to do.
And we have this
incredible protection
coming from our microbiome.
>>ROM: So we want to
diversify the microbiome
to increase not
just the bacteria,
but the main bacteria, which
is called the keystone species.
And also, eat things
that lowers the time
lag between our innate
immunity and the reinforcement
of our adaptive immunity.
So we want to keep
our inflammation down.
So the main things is
we want a diverse amount
of plant-based fiber.
That's number one.
And we want to add
turmeric, number two.
And the third thing that
was really important
is eating a lot of
seaweed and phytoplankton.
>>REGINA: You can
get-- are you talking,
like, blue-green algae?
>>ROM: Blue-green algae, yeah.
Some of the best
blue-green algae
comes from Klamath Lake
in the United States.
And spirulina and chlorella,
because the combination
of that with
fermented vegetables,
it turns out that
the keystone microbes
happened to be in our guts
when human beings came
from sea animals.
All the way back to
eukaryotic organisms
that came in through the sea.
And it just makes sense, because
they were the original microbes
in our gut.
So they love to
eat sea vegetables.
So if you can eat seaweed,
eat a lot of nori.
Just chomp on these
delicious nori.
Use that as your potato
chip when you're eating
your fermented vegetables.
So a combination of
turmeric, and you put CBD,
you put astragalus, and
you can put cordyceps
in with these
fermented vegetables
and eat that every day.
And you will really
diversify the microbiome.
And when you add seaweed, and
you add phytoplankton in there,
it diversifies the
keystone species.
>>REGINA: What happens
when, in your refrigerator,
your food turns into an
experiment where you just let
a soup sit there too long, but--
>>ROM: It's great.
>>REGINA: That's what
I was going to say.
We tend to, like,
throw it out, say, mm.
>>ROM: Do you know
why we throw it out?
It's because when you put it
in there in the first place,
it wasn't inoculated previously
with intentional microbes.
So one thing you
want to do before--
OK, so before you
add your vegetables,
you've got to steam
the vegetables.
Because you want to--
you basically want to clean
off of the microbes that
were in there.
>>REGINA: Right.
No, we talked about
this in our last show.
You can also use ozonated water,
clean them all off beforehand.
But you're saying actually
steaming your vegetables
before you put them in a soup
is a better way to go about it?
>>ROM: Well, a lot of people
don't have ozone machines.
You know, ozone would be better.
>>REGINA: It's a cheap,
easy way to do it.
>>ROM: The easy way
is called blanching.
So blanching is when
you boil some water,
and you put it to
a boil, and then
you just pour it on top of
all your fresh cut vegetables.
And then you count to 10.
Just filter it back out.
Now it's blanched.
And all the microbes
that were there are gone.
And they could be
the good microbes,
they could be the bad microbes.
But then, when you add your
little piece of kimchi, which
is all good microbes, and
your piece of sauerkraut,
which is all good
microbes, and your honey--
>>REGINA: Into your soup.
>>ROM: Into your soup.
And you just throw it
around like a salad.
And you're going
to make-- and then
you add water to
it, like halfway up.
And you're going
to start fermenting
these things over time.
And you just put
it in a mason jar.
>>REGINA: So you're doing an
intentional inoculation instead
of just letting it go bad.
>>ROM: That's right.
I will have directions
on ascendedhealth.com.
>>REGINA: OK, cool.
Because, you know,
we throw these out,
and I've often thought,
hmm, I'm wondering
if it actually might have some
beneficial microbes in there.
But like you say, it
could be anything.
Yeah, you could
get sick over them.
>>ROM: Right.
>>REGINA: OK, so now one
thing I've learned here
is that dairy-based fermentation
products don't seem to overall,
in the studies that
have been done,
have as strong an
effect as plant-based.
But what if people are, say,
making a coconut milk yogurt?
So it's a plant-based yogurt?
Is that OK?
>>ROM: They didn't find any
nut milks, or nut-based milks,
or dairy-based milks or even
sour milks that were important.
>>REGINA: Not much effect.
So it really is plants.
>>ROM: You know why?
>>REGINA: Why?
>>ROM: Because of the fiber.
>>REGINA: Oh, there's no fiber.
>>ROM: There's no fiber in it.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>ROM: So if you added the--
if you make coconut milk,
and you add the nuts, and you
actually put the coconut fiber
in there, big effect.
>>REGINA: Oh,
that's fascinating.
I'm learning so
many things here.
>>ROM: Because nuts
are full of fiber.
Yeah, they don't eat the liquid.
They chomp on the
insoluble stuff.
That's why-- you know, in the
'50s, we had food that was,
like, "digestible".
Remember that stuff?
Like, not that you
lived in the '50s.
I didn't live in the '50s.
But I just remember
these commercials
that are like, hey,
eat this cereal that's
completely digestible.
And the reason why it was
digestible was it had no fiber.
It just went boom, straight
through your system.
But you were actually
lowering your microbiome.
As human beings, we are still
hunter-gatherers at heart.
Like, If you had
an 800-chapter book
of the history of
humanity, only, like,
the very last chapter
encompasses, like,
these last 200 years
of agricultural, GMO,
or highly processed
food society.
Like, 799-- actually,
like 790 chapters
we were foraging for foods.
Right?
So in this study that--
>>REGINA: And we didn't have
great hygiene necessarily.
>>ROM: No.
No, but that was a good thing.
>>REGINA: Yeah, so I'm saying.
>>ROM: Because we incorporated
these microbes in our guts
that when we diversified
the microbiome in our guts,
they were able to
handle everything.
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about that
where children are concerned,
because in the Western world,
we've gone into these just
hyper sanitary practices
that I see as really
detrimental to kids.
>>ROM: Well, you know, I don't
see it as detrimental for kids.
And the reason why
is because I like to
sanitize before I
inoculate my fermentation.
>>REGINA: But what about in
times past, where you just
could allow nature, what's in
the dirt, to be incorporated--
microbes in the dirt to be
incorporated into the diet?
Isn't that just sort of a
natural kind of introduction?
>>ROM: That's a
natural introduction.
But now we've got toxins
in the natural world.
We've got plastics.
They just did this study
that 100% of the rain
have little bits of
nanoplastic in the rain.
>>REGINA: Oh, jeez.
OK.
>>ROM: Right?
So we've got a lot of
toxins in the environment
that we never had
even 100 years ago.
So yeah, I'm for sterilization.
>>REGINA: But I mean, just
constantly washing and putting
sanitizers on and everything.
>>ROM: Well, it just depends.
You know, I have another
company called Longevican
that I'm working with.
And we're actually creating
probiotic sanitizers
and water-based
sanitizers that--
>>REGINA: Instead
of alcohol-based
that strip everything.
>>ROM: Instead of
alcohol-based that strip
the microbiome from the skin.
We need sanitizers that
inoculate after sanitization.
>>REGINA: OK, well,
there's a solution.
>>ROM: So when we're blanching,
that's like sanitizing.
But re-inoculate.
Once you clear the
parking lot of everything,
you want to introduce the
good things, you know?
So our body is like
an open bar, you know?
You clear everyone
out of the bar.
And then when you--
like, just imagine
going into a bar with your
least favorite people.
You can't go in.
But if the bar is filled
with your friends and family,
they're not going to
allow the people that you
don't like in that bar.
OK, so a lot of people
are taking probiotics,
but they don't feel
better afterwards,
because those
probiotics actually
don't live past a certain
amount of days in your gut.
But there's one little hack to
feel better, because you can
get those probiotics to live.
And you know what it is?
It is oxygen. And you can get
oxygen in many different ways.
You know, there's actually
oxygenated waters right now.
And some of the best
water is called Ophora.
O-P-H-O-R-A, ophorawater.com.
They have stabilized
oxygen in the water.
But the best way to get
oxygen inside your gut
aside from oxygenated
water is breathing.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
And exercise, movement.
>>ROM: Movement, like walking.
>>REGINA: Walking.
>>ROM: But not
just any breathing.
Like, Wim Hof
breathing is great,
but I have a breathing coach.
His name is Bryan Mirabella,
like Bryan B-R-Y-A-N.
And he's got this class
called Breathing with Bryan.
And he's taught me how to use
a particular organ that's kind
of like the forgotten organ.
Any mammal cannot exist
without this organ.
Like, we can exist
without our spleen.
We can exist without one kidney.
But we cannot exist
without our diaphragm.
And he teaches you how to
breathe diaphragmatically.
>>REGINA: Into the diaphragm.
Yeah.
>>ROM: And if you do that--
>>REGINA: And yogic breaths.
>>ROM: --diet,
and yogic breaths,
and diaphragmatic breathing
actually gets oxygen out
of your blood and
into the cells.
So when we're measuring our
blood with the pulse oximeter
and we say, oh, we got
98%, 99% saturation,
that means all the oxygen
is not where it needs to go.
It's on the blood cells
and not into the cells.
You want your oxygen to be--
you want your actual
oxygen saturation
to be, like, down
to 96%, not 98%.
Because the oxygen is
actually getting into cells.
And through his low, slow,
and deep LSD breathing,
where you breathe
out with your ribs,
and you breathe out
with your diaphragm.
And he's got this great class
that I do on a daily basis.
And he's got 300
people in this class.
And you just do
it for once a day.
It'll start growing
the probiotics
that you take in your gut.
>>REGINA: That is
so fascinating.
>>ROM: Yeah.
And you'll feel the
difference within a week.
And the difference is
people go, oh, wow.
I feel good.
But it's not feeling good just
because the cells in your body
is getting air.
It is because the
bacteria, the facultative--
>>REGINA: They need oxygen too.
>>ROM: They need oxygen too.
The first half of
your small intestine
has oxygen-needing probiotics,
like the lactobacilli,
you know?
They'll live in the
presence of no oxygen,
because they're facultative,
but when you give them oxygen,
they love it.
Yeah?
And there are keystone
species in there
that we need to
pay attention to.
So breathing exercises are key.
>>REGINA: OK, lots of
info to take in here,
and all very useful.
All very doable,
accessible to everyone
watching the show, which is
what I love about your work.
So we need to start feeding
the guts in the ways
that we just mentioned, giving
them the right probiotics,
giving them plenty of
diverse types of fiber.
We need to breathe
so that that same--
that organisms that
are feeding off of that
have oxygen enough so
that they're healthy.
Right?
>>ROM: Yes.
I will have-- on
ascendedhealth.com,
I will have recipes,
simple recipes for people
to make their own
fermented vegetables
and how to ferment turmeric.
And also a little synopsis--
I'll do a little synopsis on
these breathing exercises.
>>REGINA: That's great.
Just to give us kind
of the little package
that anyone can bring
their gut health up.
>>ROM: We need to do that.
We need to do that--
>>REGINA: We need to
create our own healthy gut,
this area on the planet.
Anyone can do it, if nothing
else in our household.
>>ROM: Yeah.
I mean, during this
time now, you know,
we need to take a
step back and start
focusing on our
nutritional health,
especially in our schools.
>>REGINA: Oh, my gosh.
>>ROM: One thing I
would implore people
to do, all the
teachers out there,
learn about teaching children
how to increase and diversify
their gut microbiome.
>>REGINA: Any final
thoughts before we go?
>>ROM: No.
But I just wanted to
thank the audience.
And, you know, the biggest
fear is fear itself.
We're learning as we go along.
No one has all the answers.
I'm telling you,
mainstream science
is doing the best
that they can do.
Our government is doing
the best that they can do.
We're all working
in this together.
So I think just give
each other a break.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I couldn't agree more.
>>ROM: You know?
Give everybody a break.
I don't care who it is.
>>REGINA: Everyone's contending
to deal with the new world
in their own right.
>>ROM: Give scientists a break,
and give doctors a break.
Everyone's doing the best
that they can do right now.
We're all working
in this together.
>>REGINA: Yeah, which what
you've just shared with us
gives us all a chance to
work on our own behalf.
>>ROM: Please, yeah.
>>REGINA: Aside from
all the "experts".
>>ROM: Right.
>>REGINA: OK.
Compton, it's always
wonderful to see you.
Thank you again for all the
really useful information.
>>ROM: Thank you.
>>REGINA: You can
visit Compton's site
at ascendedhealth.com
for a peek at his work,
the recipes he's talking
about, and products too.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Open Minds.
[THEME MUSIC]